DirectX Bomns History

Go to http://bomns.sourceforge.net/ for the newest version.

By Date (newest first)
======================
Friday, March 29, 2002
 - Built DirectX Bomns v1.1.8.0.  The reason for this release is a small
bug-fix.  Previously, a player was unable to actually use <enter> as a key (even
though I claimed one could).  This has been fixed.

Monday, March 18, 2002
 - Built DirectX Bomns v1.0.8.0.  This is the first major, completed, and tested
release.  I've got a LITTLE work to do on some graphics, so it'll be a couple
days before I upload this, but this is when it happened.  I've got some ideas
with what I want to do with future versions, but for now, I'm done (unless there
are any bugs or anything else)!

Tuesday, March 5, 2002
 - Built DirectX Bomns v0.1.8.0 Beta.  I plan on uploading it tomorrow sometime,
after doing a bit of testing on it myself.  The engine is fully functional.  The
only things that remain are to flesh things out a bit, make stuff more flashy,
finish help messages, etc.  Of course, it needs to be tested, as well (hence,
I'm making this beta public).

Thursday, February 28, 2002
 - Released DirectX Bomns v0.0.8.3 Alpha.  The game engine is done (but not
tested), except for bomns.  That is, you can do everything but drop bomns.
Remaining before a Beta release: test engine, add bomns support, test those.
Remaining before a public release: test everything!

Saturday, February 23, 2002
 - Released DirectX Bomns v0.0.8.2.  The windows interface is complete, and the
editor is done (but has not been tested).  The engine is all that remains, but
shouldn't take long, as I've got the skeleton already in place.  I'm doing
pretty well, though, having completed the entire game and level editors in just
10 days (and only seriously coding once every two or three days!).  I rule!
Also, no bugs are known yet, but like I said, I need to test the editor a lot.

Thursday, February 14, 2002
 - Released the obligatory DirectX Bomns v0.0.8.1, with mosh.wav a-playin' (and
an annoying bug where you can only go to the screen once, then it crashes).

Wednesday, February 13, 2002
 - Started DirectX Bomns v0.0.8.0, this time TOTALLY from scratch.  Based on the
DXSpeedTest tests, I've decided the fastest way to go about this is to use
DDraw7 for the graphics.


By Version (newest first)
=========================
v1.1.8.0
--------
 - Second major public release, which fixes a bug found in v1.0.8.0.
 - Changes since last version: Fixed the bug where a player couldn't actually
use <enter> as a key in the game (even though I had indicated one could)

v1.0.8.0
--------
 - First major public release.  The game has now been tested somewhat, and
various tweaks and features have been added.
 - Changes since last version: Many, many minor changes (I'll start paying
attention to specifics next release)

v0.1.8.0
--------
 - Beta.  The initial engine is done and must be tested
 - Changes: Added bomns and explosions, various tweaks here and there, finished
engine 100%

v0.0.8.3
--------
 - Alpha.  No bomns yet, but other than that, the engine is done
 - Changes: Fixed some minor details in the editor, added some options, and got
most of the engine done

v0.0.8.2
--------
 - Editor test.  Got the windows and level editor code working
 - Changes: Actually pertinent to the game, and is cool

v0.0.8.1
--------
 - DirectX engine test.  Got the DX code up and working, wanted to test it
 - Changes: Actually does something

v0.0.8.0
--------
 - Preliminary work (nothing to release)

Less than v0.0.8.0
------------------
 - Old versions which only served to test the DirectX waters
